# Introduction

Much of this book will seem like a digression, it hardly tackles the actual subject of Software Engineering as it takes a great tangential arc away from the day-to-day job of creating software. There’s no code, no examples to work through, just the occasional computing analogy or illustration of a typical scenario in a Tech department in an organisation.  But that is the point.

This book is an exploration of what is simplistically termed ‘Soft Skills’, ‘Behavioural Competencies’, and suchlike.  These terms are inadequate for describing the depth and complexities of human nature in the context of the modern workplace.  The skills required to navigate our chaotic emotions, confusing relations with others, and our complex organisational systems are not ‘Soft’ or easy, they are very hard.  The term ‘Behavioural’ is somewhat condescending, perhaps best left to the domain of dog training.  Nonetheless, these terms have been adopted and championed by HR to form expectations of standards to which Software Engineers should conform, but there is rarely sufficient discussion, exploration, or mentoring available to guide Engineering teams in building such skills.  This book explores our messy human nature with the aim of offering discussion points, resources, concepts, and tools, which could be used to create workshops or focus groups to help Software Engineers to co-create fertile ecosystems which are most favourable for better human beings and wiser interactions to emerge.

This book uses Software Engineering as a backdrop, but the topics it explores are applicable to any profession or role within an organisational context.  It may be especially useful for tempering the competitive bravado found in Sales environments, or especially for the vile backstabbing cesspit of the Boardroom, where snakes in suits can utilise their Behavioural Competencies of Narcissism, Psychopathy and Machiavellianism.  That’s a cheap shot, it’s easy to exploit our tribalist nature and apply misattributions to others, but as a group, Software Engineers are frequently mischaracterised as socially awkward nerds, or propeller-headed eccentric geniuses whose rational minds and high IQs make them behaviourally inept social misfits.  As Walter Mitty was the ignored basement dweller, unknowingly the ‘quintessence’ of the company, Software Engineers, stoking the engines of the business, are often hidden away, misunderstood and berated by the rest of the organisation, but so critical to its viability.  The geeky socially awkward coder or the superstar hacker are simplistic generalisations, as Software Engineers are some of the most decent, thoughtful, ethical and cooperative people you could ever encounter.

With Soft Skills and Behavioural Competencies now given the same consideration as Technical or Hard Skills when assessing a Software Engineer for career progression or as a candidate for recruitment, an ambitious Engineer would be wise to devote a certain proportion of their time to investigating and indulging the kinds of experiences which would demonstrate such competencies.  This may be motivated by the genuine desire to improve oneself as a human being, to cooperate more effectively in a team and make better decisions for the organisation, or more cynically as a way of creating the right impression, showing certain surface-level behaviours in order to win favour within the formal hierarchy.  

Despite the growing emphasis on non-technical skills, there are few books or resources dedicated to the subject. The genre of fluffy psychobabble publications which adorn the self-help shelves of bookstores, or the cult-of-achievement superhuman hacks popularised by productivity gurus in their ostentatious podcasts, may not be so appealing to the Software Engineer striving for calm objectivity and an evidence-based approach.  This is not a ‘how to’ with highly prescriptive answers, it is more of a ‘why do?’ book which deliberately raises more questions than it answers.  There are almost 8 billion unique people on this planet (Earth, 2022), each with differing needs and at different stages of personal development.  No book, mantra, or ideology can provide everyone with a solution.  It is not a short-cut to acing the behavioural interview but instead aims to encourage Software Engineers to think more deeply and broadly about the situations they encounter in life and work and provides the tools to have deeper and broader conversations with colleagues to make it easier to have the difficult conversations which are so often needed when navigating the complexity of our modern and uncertain world.

## The Sections and Chapters
This book is divided into 4 sections, each with 3 chapters.  The sections and their chapters strive for internal coherence so the sections form structural units in which the chapters within follow a progressive path so that the first chapter in a section covers low-level fundamentals, the second chapter widens the scope, and in the third chapter per section we zoom out completely to take the widest possible view.  In each section we are there for taking a journey from concrete realities, zooming out for more abstract possibilities.

### Section 1:
The first section explores you as a human being, a person.  Who am I? How did I get here? Why do I act the way I do?  How do I work this?  What does it all mean?  We are often our own worst enemy, struggling against ourselves, and repeating the same mistakes over and over.  But life can also be sublime, with moments of awe and wonder, feeling the full flow of existence.  The section explores the bittersweetness of being here now.

### Section 2:
Section 2 throws other people into the mix and ponders the dramas that ensue when we all want different things.  How the push and pull of relationships leave us suspended in unfathomable social dynamics, always having to second guess what’s going on in the minds of people we encounter, especially when discerning the actions of our bosses and co-workers.  How do we fit in?  How do we make it work?  Why can’t we all just get along?

### Section 3:
Section 3 delves into the deeper complexities we encounter in the chaotic world where every decision, every action, has consequential effects and influences over other decisions and other actions in an unknowable and uncontrollable way.  We explore the domain of Systems Thinking to inform our appreciation of Complexity and try to zoom out to ponder the baffling but beautifully organic nature of the ecosystems we co-create.

### Section 4:
And finally, in Section 4, we apply the emerging philosophies of the previous sections to our actual work as Software Engineers, applying our craft to building solutions which are not only functional but beautiful and ethical too.  This final section integrates all of the previous chapters when applying ourselves to the challenges of writing code with other people in our complex organisations in an uncertain world.

## Making a difference
This book will be difficult to categorise.  Some may see it as self-help for geeks, others may see it as a psycho-social-philosophically meandering jerk-off as the author finds himself out of depth trying to make sense of the world and his experiences within it.  Feel free to categorise as you will, read with an open mind, and explore the ideas within your Engineering teams as you strive to make your work as engaging, meaningful and rewarding as possible.

Ultimately the aim of any book is to make an impact, whether a tiny ripple or a tsunami.  If it makes a positive difference to just one person who is struggling with the task of developing software in any organisation, then it has succeeded in its aim.  (Author: Bollocks to that! All this effort and just one person took notice?)
